[Java]: Java cookbook for create arrow jni dataset (#138)
apache/arrow-cookbook: java/source/dataset.rst

.. _arrow-dataset:

=======
Dataset
=======

Current java project that use JNI are:

> * `Arrow Java Dataset <https://arrow.apache.org/docs/dev/java/dataset.html>`_: Java implementation of Arrow Dataset API/Framework. JniLoader [arrow_cdata_jni]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Arrow Java Dataset <https://arrow.apache.org/docs/dev/java/dataset.html>`_: Java implementation of Arrow Datasets library. JniLoader [arrow_cdata_jni]
```

> * `Arrow Java C Data Interface <https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/CDataInterface.html>`_: Java implementation of C Data Interface. JniLoader [arrow_dataset_jni]

Reviewer: Sorry, what are the `JniLoader [arrow_cdata_jni]` snippets here referring to? (Also, they seem to be swapped between the two?)

Also, it's just called the `Arrow C Data Interface`. However, given this file is named "Dataset", maybe let's not even talk about the C Data Interface here - that can be a separate file.

Author: Changed

.. contents::

> Schema

Reviewer: I think we should reorganize this a bit. This first part is about constructing a dataset, not about schemas per se. 

When constructing a dataset, we can pass in one or more files and a file format. A dataset needs a schema. We can explicitly ask the dataset factory to inspect the files and return a schema. We should still construct the dataset with `DatasetFactory.finish(schema).` That's the first recipe.

We can add a recipe about letting the factory infer the schema. We don't call `inspect` and just call `finish`.

Then the second recipe can become "Getting the schema of a dataset". The JNI bindings don't expose this except by starting a scan, so we demonstrate that.

Reviewer: We should also add a recipe where we construct a factory from more than one file.

Author: Added a recipe for dataset
Added a recipe for construct a factory for a directory reading

======

Let read schema information for a parquet file using arrow dataset module

Inspect Schema
**************

.. testcode::

    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileFormat;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileSystemDatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.jni.NativeMemoryPool;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Schema;
    import org.apache.arrow.util.AutoCloseables;

    String uri = "file:" + System.getProperty("user.dir") + "/thirdpartydeps/parquetfiles/data1.parquet";
    RootAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator(Long.MAX_VALUE);
    DatasetFactory datasetFactory = new FileSystemDatasetFactory(rootAllocator, NativeMemoryPool.getDefault(), FileFormat.PARQUET, uri);
    Schema schema = datasetFactory.inspect();

>     AutoCloseables.close(datasetFactory);

Reviewer: We should close both the factory and the allocator here. Alternatively, we could just use try-with-resources.

Author: Added try-with-resources

    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Schema;
    import org.apache.arrow.util.AutoCloseables;

    String uri = "file:" + System.getProperty("user.dir") + "/thirdpartydeps/parquetfiles/data1.parquet";
    RootAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator(Long.MAX_VALUE);
    DatasetFactory datasetFactory = new FileSystemDatasetFactory(rootAllocator, NativeMemoryPool.getDefault(), FileFormat.PARQUET, uri);
    ScanOptions options = new ScanOptions(1);
    Dataset dataset = datasetFactory.finish();
    Scanner scanner = dataset.newScan(options);
    Schema schema = scanner.schema();
    AutoCloseables.close(datasetFactory, dataset, scanner);

    System.out.println(schema);

.. testoutput::

    Schema<id: Int(32, true), name: Utf8>(metadata: {parquet.avro.schema={"type":"record","name":"User","namespace":"org.apache.arrow.dataset","fields":[{"name":"id","type":["int","null"]},{"name":"name","type":["string","null"]}]}, writer.model.name=avro})

Query Parquet File
==================

Let query information for a parquet file usign arrow dataset module

> Query Data Size

Reviewer: We should name this "counting rows" or something. Though, I don't think it's a useful recipe to show in the first place. Particularly because specifying batchSize = 1 will be slow.

Author: Deleted

    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileFormat;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileSystemDatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.jni.NativeMemoryPool;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.ScanOptions;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.Scanner;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.Dataset;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.util.AutoCloseables;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.FieldVector;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorLoader;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorSchemaRoot;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.ipc.message.ArrowRecordBatch;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Schema;

    import java.util.List;
    import java.util.stream.Collectors;
    import java.util.stream.StreamSupport;

    String uri = "file:" + System.getProperty("user.dir") + "/thirdpartydeps/parquetfiles/data1.parquet";
    RootAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator(Long.MAX_VALUE);
    DatasetFactory datasetFactory = new FileSystemDatasetFactory(rootAllocator, NativeMemoryPool.getDefault(), FileFormat.PARQUET, uri);

>     ScanOptions options = new ScanOptions(1);

Reviewer: Let's not use batchSize = 1. We shouldn't demonstrate suboptimal settings to people.

    Dataset dataset = datasetFactory.finish();
    Scanner scanner = dataset.newScan(options);
    Schema schema = scanner.schema();
    List<ArrowRecordBatch> batches = StreamSupport.stream(scanner.scan().spliterator(), false).flatMap(t -> Streams.stream(t.execute())).collect(Collectors.toList());
    int fieldCount = schema.getFields().size();
    try (VectorSchemaRoot vsr = VectorSchemaRoot.create(schema, rootAllocator)) {
        VectorLoader loader = new VectorLoader(vsr);
        for (ArrowRecordBatch batch : batches) {
            loader.load(batch);
            int batchRowCount = vsr.getRowCount();
            for (int i = 0; i < fieldCount; i++) {
                FieldVector vector = vsr.getVector(i);
                for (int j = 0; j < batchRowCount; j++) {
                    Object object = vector.getObject(j);
                    System.out.println(object);
                }
            }
        }

>     }

Reviewer: We should do this iteratively instead of collecting all data into a list.

Author: Changed to print root data after loading

    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileSystemDatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.jni.NativeMemoryPool;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.ScanOptions;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.Scanner;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.Dataset;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorLoader;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorSchemaRoot;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.ipc.message.ArrowRecordBatch;

    import java.util.stream.Stream;

    String uri = "file:" + System.getProperty("user.dir") + "/thirdpartydeps/parquetfiles/data1.parquet";
    try(RootAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator(Long.MAX_VALUE);
        DatasetFactory datasetFactory = new FileSystemDatasetFactory(rootAllocator, NativeMemoryPool.getDefault(), FileFormat.PARQUET, uri);
        Dataset dataset = datasetFactory.finish()){
        ScanOptions options = new ScanOptions(/*batchSize*/ 100);
        try(Scanner scanner = dataset.newScan(options);
            VectorSchemaRoot vsr = VectorSchemaRoot.create(scanner.schema(), rootAllocator)){

>             scanner.scan().forEach(scanTask-> {

Reviewer: Thanks for updating this.

Though, these bindings use an outdated API…we need to fix that (not here).

Reviewer: Filed https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-15745

    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.util.AutoCloseables;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.FieldVector;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorLoader;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorSchemaRoot;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.ipc.message.ArrowRecordBatch;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Schema;

    import java.util.List;
    import java.util.stream.Collectors;
    import java.util.stream.StreamSupport;

    String uri = "file:" + System.getProperty("user.dir") + "/thirdpartydeps/parquetfiles/";
    try(RootAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator(Long.MAX_VALUE);
        DatasetFactory datasetFactory = new FileSystemDatasetFactory(rootAllocator, NativeMemoryPool.getDefault(), FileFormat.PARQUET, uri);
        Dataset dataset = datasetFactory.finish()){
        ScanOptions options = new ScanOptions(/*batchSize*/ 100);
        try(Scanner scanner = dataset.newScan(options);
            VectorSchemaRoot vsr = VectorSchemaRoot.create(scanner.schema(), rootAllocator)){
            scanner.scan().forEach(scanTask-> {

>                 Stream<ArrowRecordBatch> stream = Streams.stream(scanTask.execute());

Author: Updated

>             List<ArrowRecordBatch> batches = StreamSupport.stream(scanner.scan().spliterator(), false).flatMap(t -> Streams.stream(t.execute())).collect(Collectors.toList());

Reviewer: Again, can we iterate over this directly instead of collecting to a list first? It's verbose and demonstrates bad habits (this will load all data into memory first).

Reviewer: We don't need to print the number of batches below.

Author: Updated and delete print number batches

    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.util.AutoCloseables;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.FieldVector;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorLoader;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorSchemaRoot;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.ipc.message.ArrowRecordBatch;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Schema;

    import java.util.List;
    import java.util.Optional;
    import java.util.stream.Collectors;
    import java.util.stream.StreamSupport;

    String uri = "file:" + System.getProperty("user.dir") + "/thirdpartydeps/parquetfiles/data1.parquet";
    try(RootAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator(Long.MAX_VALUE);
        DatasetFactory datasetFactory = new FileSystemDatasetFactory(rootAllocator, NativeMemoryPool.getDefault(), FileFormat.PARQUET, uri);
        Dataset dataset = datasetFactory.finish()){
        String[] projection = new String[] {"name"};
        ScanOptions options = new ScanOptions(/*batchSize*/ 100, Optional.of(projection));
        try(Scanner scanner = dataset.newScan(options)){
            Schema schema = scanner.schema();

>             List<ArrowRecordBatch> batches = StreamSupport.stream(scanner.scan().spliterator(), false).flatMap(t -> Streams.stream(t.execute())).collect(Collectors.toList());

Reviewer: Let's fix this one too.

Author: Updated

.. _arrow-dataset:

=======
Dataset
=======

> * `Arrow Java Dataset <https://arrow.apache.org/docs/dev/java/dataset.html>`_: Java implementation of Arrow Datasets library.

Reviewer: Maybe make it explicit that it's JNI bindings, not a separate implementation?

Can we use Intersphinx to do this linking? (Example for Python: https://github.com/apache/arrow-cookbook/blob/main/python/source/flight.rst#authentication-with-userpassword)

Reviewer: I didn't see a change here, did I miss it?

Author: Sorry, were problems in pull/merge, added finally

.. contents::

> Dataset
> =======

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Constructing Datasets
=====================
```

> Let construct our dataset with auto-inferred schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can construct a dataset with an auto-inferred schema.
```

    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileFormat;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileSystemDatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.jni.NativeMemoryPool;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.ScanOptions;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.Scanner;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.Dataset;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import java.util.stream.StreamSupport;

    try (RootAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator(Long.MAX_VALUE)) {
        String uri = "file:" + System.getProperty("user.dir") + "/thirdpartydeps/parquetfiles/data1.parquet";
        try (DatasetFactory datasetFactory = new FileSystemDatasetFactory(rootAllocator, NativeMemoryPool.getDefault(), FileFormat.PARQUET, uri)) {
            try(Dataset dataset = datasetFactory.finish()){
                ScanOptions options = new ScanOptions(100);
                try(Scanner scanner = dataset.newScan(options)){
                    System.out.println(StreamSupport.stream(scanner.scan().spliterator(), false).count());
                }
            }
        }
    }

.. testoutput::

    1

> Let construct our dataset with predefined schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also explicitly discover the schema during dataset construction, and pass that to the factory. We could modify or replace the schema ourselves if needed here.
```

    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileSystemDatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.jni.NativeMemoryPool;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.ScanOptions;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.Scanner;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.Dataset;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import java.util.stream.StreamSupport;

    String uri = "file:" + System.getProperty("user.dir") + "/thirdpartydeps/parquetfiles/data1.parquet";
    try (RootAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator(Long.MAX_VALUE)) {
        try (DatasetFactory datasetFactory = new FileSystemDatasetFactory(rootAllocator, NativeMemoryPool.getDefault(), FileFormat.PARQUET, uri)) {
            try(Dataset dataset = datasetFactory.finish(datasetFactory.inspect())){
                ScanOptions options = new ScanOptions(100);
                try(Scanner scanner = dataset.newScan(options)){
                    System.out.println(StreamSupport.stream(scanner.scan().spliterator(), false).count());
                }
            }
        }
    }

.. testoutput::

    1

> Getting the Schema of a Dataset

Reviewer: This section doesn't make sense to have anymore.

Author: Could be ok to maintain this if the user need to print wat is the schema readed by dataset library ?

Reviewer: I suppose. Could the recipes then be named something like "Getting Schema During Dataset Construction" and "Getting Schema from a Dataset"?

    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileSystemDatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.jni.NativeMemoryPool;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.ScanOptions;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.Scanner;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.Dataset;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.util.AutoCloseables;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.FieldVector;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorLoader;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.VectorSchemaRoot;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.ipc.message.ArrowRecordBatch;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.types.pojo.Schema;

    import java.util.List;
    import java.util.stream.Collectors;
    import java.util.stream.StreamSupport;

    String uri = "file:" + System.getProperty("user.dir") + "/thirdpartydeps/parquetfiles/data1.parquet";
    try(RootAllocator rootAllocator = new RootAllocator(Long.MAX_VALUE);
        DatasetFactory datasetFactory = new FileSystemDatasetFactory(rootAllocator, NativeMemoryPool.getDefault(), FileFormat.PARQUET, uri);
        Dataset dataset = datasetFactory.finish()){

>         ScanOptions options = new ScanOptions(100);

Reviewer: In all these recipes, can we provide comments for parameters like this?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        ScanOptions options = new ScanOptions(/*batchSize*/ 100);
```

Reviewer: Also, something like 1024 might be more reasonable?

        try(Scanner scanner = dataset.newScan(options)){
            Schema schema = scanner.schema();

>             List<ArrowRecordBatch> batches = StreamSupport.stream(scanner.scan().spliterator(), false).flatMap(t -> Streams.stream(t.execute())).collect(Collectors.toList());

Reviewer: Can we iterate instead of collecting all data up front?

Author: Is there some reason for that? I saw the unit test and it was implemented in this way.

Reviewer: Unit tests aren't necessarily examples of good code, and collecting all data up front means we have to have enough memory for all the data.

Author: Changed

>             try (VectorSchemaRoot vsr = VectorSchemaRoot.create(schema, rootAllocator)) {

Reviewer: Why not create the root in the same try-with-resources block as the scanner itself, and save an indentation level?

Author: Changed

        Dataset dataset = datasetFactory.finish()){
        ScanOptions options = new ScanOptions(100);
        try(Scanner scanner = dataset.newScan(options)){
            Schema schema = scanner.schema();
            List<ArrowRecordBatch> batches = StreamSupport.stream(scanner.scan().spliterator(), false).flatMap(t -> Streams.stream(t.execute())).collect(Collectors.toList());
            try (VectorSchemaRoot vsr = VectorSchemaRoot.create(schema, rootAllocator)) {
                VectorLoader loader = new VectorLoader(vsr);
                System.out.println("Batch Size: " + batches.size());
                int count = 1;
                for (ArrowRecordBatch batch : batches) {
                    loader.load(batch);
                    System.out.println("Batch: " + count++ + ", RowCount: " + vsr.getRowCount());
                    batch.close();
                }
            }
        }
    }

.. testoutput::

    Batch Size: 5
    Batch: 1, RowCount: 3
    Batch: 2, RowCount: 3
    Batch: 3, RowCount: 100
    Batch: 4, RowCount: 100
    Batch: 5, RowCount: 50

Query Data Content with Projection
**********************************

> 

Reviewer: We should add a short explanation here that we can choose which columns to read from the dataset.
